PROJECT ASSESSMENT - INAUGURAL ADDRESSES
Dr. Campbell, 12/18/2021

The goal of this project was to present and study all fifty-nine US presidential inaugural addresses, from George Washington to Joe Biden. As a two-person project, it was good that it had a clearly-defined scope: aside from locating the texts of the most recent addresses (since the Project Gutenberg source text was published some years back and did not include them), there was essentially no outside research that was needed, and all the texts went into a single comprehensive XML document.

As the team was aware from the outset, other Inaugural Addresses projects have been done before. This one was different in that the team did their markup manually, while at least one prior team relied on sentiment analysis, which is done automatically.

The team agreed on five topics to tag: War, Diplomacy, Religion, Economy, and Social. "Social" was a broad category, initially intended to include both slavery (before the Civil War) and Civil Rights (especially after the Civil War). The team split the markup workload by even- and odd-numbered addresses. As they acknowledged, their tagging choices were necessarily matters of individual discretion. In theory, it would have been ideal for them to have kept checking in with one another throughout the markup process, looking at one another's markup and conferring on any disagreements, to keep a kind of consistent intellectual schema as well as the Relax-NG markup schema. In practice, the fact that one of the team members was unavoidably delayed from doing his share of the markup, and then needed to work hard to catch up, made such conferences impractical. Thus the results are perhaps a little less firm than they might otherwise have been. Still, this is probably a small problem, and the overall hierarchy of topics in any given speech is unlikely to be off by any considerable margin.

The markup of topics was expressed in two ways on the site. First, on the "texts" page, the user can click tick boxes to change the text color and thus visualize the exact words in each speech that refer to each topic. This was done with JavaScript, which was something that we did not have time for the whole class to cover. It is beneficial for the user to be able to control this, because if one is looking for just one topic at a time, it is far easier to be able to toggle that topic on and leave the others turned off.

The second way it is expressed is in a pair of SVG bar graphs that show the prevalence of each topic in each speech, both by absolute length (using the string-length() XPath function) and by percentage of the speech (calculated by dividing the string-length of each topic within the speech by the string-length of that whole speech). These are very good graphics, easy to understand at a glance.

One minor error I am just now realizing: in the percentage graphs, the speech length does a string-join of all the <p> elements, but that likely takes in the editor's introduction that appears above some speeches. This means that some of those percentages should be higher; but the relative percentages within each speech ("twice as much of this as of that") are unaffected. This could be fixed, I think, by calculating the string-length of the speech not with (descendant::p) but with (child::p), since the <p> elements containing the notes are within <d class="editnote"> tags and thus not direct child elements of <address>.

Tha addition of the year to the president's name on the SVG graphs was a last-minute one, and it sometimes runs into the bars of the graph. This could have been fixed by making the year a separate <text> element in the SVG, to be placed above or below the president's name; or moving the axis of the graph to the right using transform(translate) to make more space for the text. It is also noted that "Religion" is misspelled "Relgion" on both graphs, a minor typo that would hardly be noticeable but for the fact that it appears 59 times on each of the pages!

It might also have been interesting (and would not be difficult) to take this a tiny bit further by finding the averages for the whole series, as a sort of baseline; and to divide the speeches into periods, and track how topics rose and fell in aggregate. Further, as the team acknowledged, "social" could be subdivided into other topics to be tracked more specifically. I would note that the same is true of "economics", which covered both government finances and private-sector profits. These are potential future tasks, though, not faults of the present project.

The web interface is simple and clean. There are a handful of images on the index page. Given the limited time available, the students chose to focus more on making everything work cleanly and less on making the site flashy, a choice of substance over style. While playing further with CSS and JavaScript might have been tempting, I think they made the right call.